### Extracted and adapted from Ekama (2017) “Optimizing water and resource recovery facilities (WRRF) for energy generation without compromising effluent quality”. IWA joint nutrient removal and recovery (NRR) and large wastewater treatment plant (LWWTP) conference “Sustainable Wastewater Treatment and Resource Recovery: Research, Planning, Design and Operation”, 6-8 November, 2017. 

## INFLUENT WASTEWATER CHARACTERISTICS 
For validation of the UCT-ICRA steady state model, wastewater (WW)
characteristics used in previous studies are used (WRC, 1984; Ekama, 2009,
2011, 2017 - Tables 1a to c). The University of Cape Town
nitrification-denitrification (UCT-ICRA) steady state model (SSM) requires 8
raw influent WW concentrations, the 5 organics components making up the
chemical oxygen demand (COD), i.e. (i) volatile fatty acids (VFA), (ii)
fermentable biodegradable soluble organics (FBSO), (iii) unbiodegradable
soluble organics (USO), (iv) biodegradable particulate organics (BPO), (v)
unbiodegradable particulate organics (UPO), and the 3 inorganics components,
i.e. (vi) free and saline ammonia (FSA), (vii) ortho-phosphate (OP) and (viii)
inorganic suspended solids (ISS). The particulate components (BPO, UPO, ISS)
each subdivide into settleable and non-settleable fractions. Each of the 5
organics groups have a COD (fcv), carbon (C) (fc), nitrogen (N) (fn) and
phosphorus (P) (fp) to mass ratio (Table 1a). The raw WW component COD
concentrations (Table 1c) are calculated from the selected raw WW COD fractions
(Table 1b) and the organic N and P concentrations are calculated from the
component COD concentrations and mass ratios (Table 1a). The influent Total
Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN) and Total P (TP) are then the sum of the organic N and
free and saline ammonia (FSA) and the organic P and ortho-P (OP) respectively.
The proportions of the particulate components (BPO, UPO, ISS) that are
settleable are selected and it is assumed the primary separation unit (PSU)
removes 100% of these settleable components, while maintaining 100% water, COD,
N, P and ISS mass balances. In this fractionation method the dissolved
concentrations are the same in the primary sludge (PS) and settled and raw WW
and the only settled WW fraction that is independent of the raw WW is the
settled WW UPO fraction (fS’up) via the selected proportions of BPO and UPO
settled out in the PSU. The dissolved and non-settleable concentrations
constitute the settled WW and the dissolved and settleable concentrations
constitute the PS. By selecting increasing proportions of BPO, UPO and ISS that
are settleable, the effect of the split of organics and ISS between the PS
anaerobic digester (AD) and the biological nutrient removal activated sludge
(BNRAS) system on the WRRF energy production and consumption and effluent
quality was investigated (Ekama, 2017) (Table 2). These are features that will
be added in future versions of the UCT-ICRA steady state model.  

Table 1a: Organic component mass ratios and molar compositions used in this
investigation to align with raw and settled wastewater concentrations used in
previous papers (WRC, 1984; Ekama, 2009, 2011).

<table>
  <tr><th>Group<th>COD<th> C<th> H<th> O<th> N<th> P<th colspan=5> Composition in CxHyOzNaPb (x=1)
  <tr><th>Ratio<th> fcv<th> fC<th> fH<th> fO<th> fN<th> fP<th> x<th> y<th> z<th> a<th> b
  <tr><td>VFA <td>1.067 <td>0.400 <td>0.067 <td>0.533 <td>0.0 <td>0.0 <td>1.0 <td>2.0 <td>1.0 <td>0.0 <td>0.0
  <tr><td>FBSO <td>1.420 <td>0.470 <td>0.076 <td>0.427 <td>0.017 <td>0.010 <td>1.0 <td>1.942 <td>0.681 <td>0.030 <td>0.008
  <tr><td>USO <td>1.420 <td>0.470 <td>0.074 <td>0.370 <td>0.049 <td>0.000 <td>1.0 <td>1.833 <td>0.600 <td>0.086 <td>0.000
  <tr><td>BPO <td>1.500 <td>0.510 <td>0.069 <td>0.392 <td>0.019 <td>0.010 <td>1.0 <td>1.623 <td>0.577 <td>0.032 <td>0.008
  <tr><td>UPO <td>1.481 <td>0.518 <td>0.066 <td>0.291 <td>0.100 <td>0.025 <td>1.0 <td>1.534 <td>0.421 <td>0.166 <td>0.019
</table>

In this UCT-ICRA SSM, settleable and non-settleable organics have the same composition. While this affects the split of N and P between the BNRAS and AD by the PSU, methods of measuring the compositions of settleable and non-settleable BPO and UPO are currently under investigation. 
  
Table 1b: Default raw and settled wastewater fractions in UCT-ICRA SSM.
<table>
<tr><th>Fraction<th> Raw <th>Settled <th>Fraction <th>Raw <th>Settled 
<tr><td>Unbiod. soluble COD (fS’us)    <td> 0.050<td> 0.076<td> Unbio COD of settleable COD       <td>0.319 <td>0.000
<tr><td>Unbiod. particulate COD (fS’up)<td>	0.130<td> 0.029<td> FSA/TKN ratio                     <td>0.611 <td>0.734
<tr><td>RBCOD of total COD (fS’bs)     <td> 0.134<td> 0.206<td> OP/TP ratio                       <td>0.600 <td>0.721
<tr><td>RBCOD of biodeg COD (fSb’s)    <td> 0.163<td> 0.230<td> VSetS/TSetS ratio                 <td>0.789 <td>0.000
<tr><td>Settleable COD of total COD    <td> 0.349<td> 0.000<td> ISS to total COD ratio (XIoi/Sti) <td>0.087 <td>0.045
</table>

Table 2c: Wastewater concentrations calculated from total COD concentrations
(Raw 750, Settled 450) and mass ratios in Table 1a and fractions in Table 1b.
100% settleable organics (BPO and UPO) and ISS removal in PSU is assumed. The
settled WW concentrations conform to the observation that UPO and ISS are
removed in greater proportion (84%, 80%) than BPO (47%) (Wentzel et al., 2006;
Ikumi et al., 2014). Overall COD, N and P removals in PSU for given
concentrations are 40.3%, 15.3% and 21.5%.   

<table>
  <tr><td><td>Raw WW <td colspan=3>Settleable <td>Settled WW <td colspan=3>Non-settleable <td colspan=4>Dissolved
  <tr><td><td><td>BPO <td>UPO <td>InOrg <td><td>BPO <td>UPO <td>InOrg <td>VFA <td>FBSO <td>USO<td>InOrg
  <tr><td>COD   <td>750  <td>206  <td>94   <td>--- <td>450   <td>233  <td>18  <td>--- <td>0   <td>147  <td>52   <td>---
  <tr><td>SuspS <td>416  <td>137  <td>64   <td>38  <td>177   <td>155  <td>12  <td>10  <td>--- <td>---  <td>---  <td>---
  <tr><td>TKN   <td>60.0 <td>2.6  <td>6.4  <td>--- <td>51.1  <td>3.0  <td>1.2 <td>--- <td>0   <td>1.7  <td>1.8  <td>43.3
  <tr><td>TP    <td>14.0 <td>1.4  <td>1.6  <td>--- <td>11.0  <td>1.6  <td>0.3 <td>--- <td>--- <td>1.0  <td>0.0  <td>8.2
  <tr><td>TOC   <td>255  <td>70.0 <td>32.9 <td>--- <td>152.1 <td>79.3 <td>6.3 <td>--- <td>0.0 <td>48.7 <td>17.8 <td>---
</table>

## SOME PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS
### The balanced BNRAS system sludge age (SRT)

The balanced SRT offers the lowest BNRAS system reactor volume because it is
the shortest SRT at which it can be operated to ensure nitrification and
achieve the lowest economical effluent nitrate concentration. At the balanced
SRT, the denitrification performance of the primary anoxic zone is optimal
because the maximum practical a-recyle ratio (aprac, say 6:1) is equal to the
optimum a-recyle ratio (aopt). At aopt, the equivalent nitrate load on the
anoxic zone, which is set by the influent TKN concentration and includes the
dissolved oxygen (DO) recycled from the aerobic zone, is equal to its
denitrification potential (Dp1), which is set by the influent organics (COD)
concentration. At aopt, the effluent nitrate concentration (Nne) is lowest
because a lower a-recycle ratio under loads the anoxic zone with nitrate and a
higher a-recycle ratio over loads the anoxic zone with nitrate and discharges
unnecessary high DO to the anoxic zone, which reduces denitrification and
increases effluent nitrate (Fig 2).  The maximum practical a-recyle ratio
(aprac) is set at around 5 to 7:1 because increasing the ratio above this
reduces the effluent nitrate concentration by only 1 to 2 mgNO3-N/l (<2%),
which is not worth the increase in electrical power costs from recycling 1x or
2x ADWF more. 

The balanced SRT for the MLE system (Fig 1a) was first proposed by van Haandel
et al. (1982) and its determination by an iterative procedure is described in
detail in Henze et al. (2008), viz. for given wastewater characteristics, the
SRT is increased incrementally and the maximum unaerated sludge mass fraction
(fxm), nitrification capacity (Nc), denitrification potential of the primary
anoxic zone (Dp1) set equal to fxm, aopt and Nne are calculated.  An aprac is
selected (say 6:1) and the SRT at which the aopt=aprac is the MLE system
balanced SRT. An explicit equation for the balanced SRT of the MLE is given by
Robertson and Ekama (2016). 

The UCT and JHB systems (to be included in future versions of UCT-ICRA SSM)
also have a balanced system SRT. Explicit equations for these have not been
derived because they are complicated by the iterative calculation which divides
the influent FBSO between the polyphosphate accumulating organisms (PAO) and
ordinary heterotrophic organisms (OHO) (Wentzel et al., 1990). It is easiest to
determine them with the iterative procedure by incrementally increasing the
system SRT until aopt=aprac (say 6:1) (Robertson and Ekama, 2016). The main
differences in the calculation for the balanced system SRT of the UCT and JHB
systems compared with that for the MLE system are (i) the influent FBSO has to
be divided between the OHO and PAO (which get ~80-90%) with the fermentation
model of Wentzel et al. (1985) or Wentzel et al. (1990), Henze et al. (2008),
Ekama (2011), (ii) denitrification is mediated by OHO only and (iii) the
specific OHO denitrification rate in the primary and secondary anoxic zones at
20oC (K220) are increased from 0.101 and 0.072 mgNO3-N/(mgOHOVSS.d) in ND
systems to 0.255 and 0.114 mgNO3-N/(mgOHOVSS.d) in NDEBPR systems (Clayton et
al., 1991; Ekama and Wentzel, 1999). Additionally, for the UCT system (iv) the
primary anoxic sludge mass fraction (fx1) is the difference between the maximum
unaerated sludge mass fraction (fxm) allowed at a particular SRT to ensure
nitrification and the anaerobic sludge mass fraction (fxa), viz. fx1=fxm-fxa
and for the JHB system (iv) the sum of the primary (fx1) and secondary (fx3)
(underflow) anoxic sludge mass fractions (fx1+fx3) is the difference between
the maximum unaerated sludge mass fraction (fxm) allowed at a particular SRT to
ensure nitrification and the anaerobic sludge mass fraction (fxa), viz.
fx1+fx3=fxm-fxa. 

Subject to the above four changes, the equation for the optimum a-recycle ratio
(aopt) for the UCT system is the same as for the MLE system and the SRT at
which aopt= aprac= (say) 6:1 is the balanced SRT for the UCT system (Henze et
al., 2008; Ekama, 2011). Similarly, the balanced SRT for the JHB system is the
SRT at which the primary anoxic zone (fx1) is loaded exactly to its
denitrification potential by the optimum a-recycle ratio (aopt) equal the
maximum practical (aopt=aprac) and the secondary anoxic zone (fx3) in the
underflow is exactly large enough to denitrify the nitrate entering it to
protect the VFA uptake by PAO in the anaerobic zone. 

Setting the required SRT on a BNRAS plant is extremely important - if the SRT
is not known accurately, the plant cannot be modelled accurately. Withdrawal of
WAS from the underflow does not control SRT! The advantages of establishing and
controlling SRT on BNR systems hydraulically by wasting from the reactor a
fixed fraction of the reactor volume daily (as in Fig 1) is outlined by Ekama
(2010).

For the same wastewater characteristics and SRT, the mass of TSS in an NDEBPR
reactor is 15-20% higher than in an ND reactor because (i) PAO produce more VSS
per kgCOD than OHO due to their lower endogenous respiration rate (0.04/d
compared with 0.24/d at 20oC) and (ii) there is additional ISS from the PAO
polyphosphate content (3.286 mgISS/mgP). With chemical P removal, a higher ISS
is expected from the phosphate precipitate that is formed by the dosed cation.
The same applies to EBPR, except the “precipitate” is polyphosphate and Mg, K
and Ca cations in the influent are used by PAO to form it (Ekama and Wentzel,
2004). So for the same organic load, NDEBPR systems have larger reactors
because (i) sludge production is higher and (ii) their balanced SRTs are longer
to accommodate the anaerobic reactor.   


### Determining the volume and SST area for a BNR system 
Once the SRT of a BNRAS system is established, the mass of TSS in the reactor
(MXt, kgTSS) is known
from the organic (and ISS) load on the reactor (FSti = QADWFSti, kgCOD/d),
where  QADWF is the average dry weather flow (ADWF), Sti the total flow
weighted average influent COD concentration to the BNR system. MXt is the
product of the average reactor TSS concentration (Xtave) and the reactor volume
(VR), viz. MXt=XtaveVR. Hence the reactor volume is found by selecting a
reactor TSS concentration (Xtave). Selection of Xtave is done via a reactor
volume and SST area cost minimization calculation (Ekama et al., 1997; Ekama,
2011). As Xtave increases so the reactor volume (VR) and its cost decrease and
(for a selected sludge settleability) the SST area (AST) and its cost increase.
The combined cost will be a minimum over a range (~2 gTSS/l) of reactor TSS
concentration and a TSS in this range is selected for the BNR-SST system. This
reactor TSS for minimum combined cost increases for (1) raw WW, (2) higher
influent COD concentration, (3) longer SRT and (4) EBPR because these increase
the mass of TSS in the reactor (MXt) without affecting the SST area. In
contrast, the TSS for minimum combined cost decreases for (5) higher peak wet
weather flow (PWWF) to ADWF ratio (fq) and (6) poorer sludge settleability
because these increase the area of the SST without affecting the mass of TSS in
the reactor (MXt). Required in this calculation is the link between the average
reactor TSS concentration (Xtave) and the aerobic reactor TSS concentration
(Xtaer) because these are different for different BNR systems. For systems with
the same TSS concentration in each zone, like the MLE and 3, 4 and 5 stage
Bardenpho systems, Xtave = Xtaer and so Xtave can be replaced by Xtaer in the
cost minimization calculation. However, for UCT and JHB systems, Xtaer ≠ Xtave
because the TSS concentration is not the same in each zone of the system. In
the UCT system, the anaerobic zone TSS concentration is a factor r/(1+r) times
Xtaer and for the JHB system, the underflow anoxic zone TSS concentration is a
factor (1+s)/s times Xtaer. From the equations relating sludge mass and volume
fractions of different BNR systems with SST (or membranes) of Ramphao et al.
(2006), for the UCT system, Xtave=Xtaer[1-fxa/(1+r)] and for the JHB system,
Xtave=Xtaer /[1+fx3/s]. So for the UCT and JHB systems, Xtave needs to be
replaced with these Xtaer equations in the MXtave= XtaveVR because Xtaer is the
SST feed TSS concentration in these systems.    

### Determining the capacity of an existing BNR system
For a given biological reactor volume VR (and anaerobic mass fraction fxa if
applicable) and SST surface area (AST), the average dry weather flow (QADWF)
capacity (ML/d) can be calculated for a particular WW with known
characteristics. With the required (balanced) SRT known, the mass of sludge in
the reactor (MXt, kgTSS) per kgCOD/d load applied to the reactor [Lsys
kgTSS/(kgCOD/d)] is known, i.e. MXt = Lsys QADWFSti where Lsys is a function of
SRT and the WW characteristics and is different for ND (LND) and NDEBPR (LEBPR)
systems (Ramphao et al., 2006).  Hence, QADWF = VR Xtave/(Sti.Lsys) ML/d. This
equation has two unknowns, QADWF and Xtave, so one more fact is required to
determine QADWF. This is obtained from the overflow rate on the SST. From the
1DFT, the overflow rate at PWWF must not be greater than the flux rating (0.8,
Ekama and Marais, 2004) times settling velocity of the sludge at the SST feed
or aerobic zone TSS concentration (VS), i.e. QPWWF/AST = 0.8VS =
0.8V0exp(-nXtaer) (m/h), where V0 and n can be calculated (with caution!) from
the Stirred Specific Volume (SSVI) or Diluted Sludge Volume Index (DSVI) (Ekama
et al., 1997, Ekama and Marais, 1984). Converting QPWWF to ML/d and selecting a
PWWF/ADWF ratio (fq), yields, QADWF = (24AST0.8V0)/(1000 fq).exp(-n Xtaer)
ML/d.  Then, substituting the Xtaer equivalents of Xtave yields for the MLE:
Xtaer= F.exp(-n. Xtaer), where F= (AST 0.8V0 Sti LND 24)/(VR fq 1000).  UCT:
Xtaer= G.exp(-n. Xtaer), where G= (AST 0.8V0 Sti LEBPR 24)/{VR fq 1000
[1-fxa/(1+r)]} JHB: Xtaer= H.exp(-n.  Xtaer), where H= [AST 0.8V0 Sti LEBPR 24
(1+fx3/s)]/(VR fq 1000) These equations are solved by finding the Xtaer that
equates the left and right hand sides. Once Xtaer is found, the WRRF capacity
is given by either of the QADWF equations above.

## REFERENCES
<ul>
  <li>1Clayton JA, Ekama GA, Wentzel MC and Marais GvR (1991) Denitrification kinetics in biological nitrogen and phosphorus removal systems treating municipal wastewaters. Wat. Sci. Tech., 23(4/6-2) 1025-1035.
  <li>Ekama GA and Marais GvR (1986) Sludge settleability and secondary settling tank design procedures. J. Water Pollut. Control., 85(1) 101-113.
  <li>Ekama GA, Barnard JL, Guenthert FW, Krebs P, McCorquodale JA, Parker DS and Wahlberg EJ (1997) Secondary settling tanks: Theory, design, modelling and operation. IAWQ STR No 6, pp216, International Association on Water Quality, London. ISBN 900222 03 5, ISSN 1025-0913.
  <li>Ekama GA and Wentzel MC (1999) Denitrification kinetics in N and P removal activated sludge systems treating municipal wastewaters. Wat. Sci. Tech., 39(6) 69-77. 
  <li>Ekama GA and Marais P (2004) Assessing the applicability of the 1D flux theory to full scale secondary settling tank design with a 2D hydrodynamic model. Wat. Res., 38(3) 495-506. 
  <li>Ekama GA and Wentzel MC (2004) A predictive model for the reactor inorganic suspended solids concentration in activated sludge systems. Wat. Res., 38(19) 4093-4106.
  <li>Ekama GA (2009) Using bio-process stoichiometry to build a steady state plant wide wastewater treatment plant model. Wat. Res., 43(8) 2101-2120.
  <li>Ekama GA (2010) The role and control of sludge age in biological nutrient removal activated sludge systems. Wat. Sci. Tech., 61(7) 1645-1652. 
  <li>Ekama GA (2011) Biological nutrient removal. In: Wilderer P (ed.) Treatise on Water Science, Vol 4, pp409-528. Oxford: Academic Press.
  <li>Henze M, van Loosdrecht MCM, Ekama GA and Brdjanovic D (2008) Biological wastewater treatment: Principles, modelling and design. IWA Publishing, London. 528 pages. ISBN - 10:1843391880; 13:9781843391883.
  <li>Ikumi DS, Harding TH and Ekama GA (2014) Biodegradability of wastewater and activated sludge organics in anaerobic digestion. Wat. Res., 56(1) 267-279.
  <li>Ramphao MC, Wentzel MC, Merritt R, Ekama GA, Young T and Buckley CA (2005) The impact of membrane solid-liquid separation on the design of biological nutrient removal activated sludge systems. Biotech & Bioeng., 89(6) 630-646. 
  <li>2Robertson J and Ekama GA (2016) A comparison of conventional activated sludge and integrated fixed film media in MLE, UCT and JHB configurations. Procs. 14th biennial WISA conference and exhibition, Durban, 15-19 May, 2016.
  <li>Van Haandel AC, Dold PL and Marais GvR (1982) Optimization of nitrogen removal in the single sludge activated sludge process. Wat. Sci. Tech. 14, 443-446.
  <li>Wentzel MC, Dold PL, Ekama GA and Marais GvR (1985) Kinetics of biological phosphorus release. Wat. Sci. Tech., 17, 57-71.
  <li>Wentzel MC, Ekama GA, Dold PL and Marais GvR (1990) Biological excess phosphorus removal - steady state process design. Water SA, 16(1) 29-48. 
  <li>Wentzel MC, Ekama GA and Sotemann SW (2006) Mass balances based plant wide wastewater treatment plant models - Part 1: Biodegradability of wastewater organics under anaerobic conditions. Water SA, 32(3) 269-275.
  <li>WRC (1984) Theory, design and operation of nutrient removal activated sludge processes (Chs 4-6). Ed. Wiechers HNS, Water Research Commission, TT16/84 , ISBN 0 908356 13 7. (www.wrc.org.za).
</ul>
